README.md, before:

<h1 align="center">Quantum Acorn</h1>

<h4 align="center">
  <a href="https://github.com/tjira/acorn#features">Features</a>
  ·
  <a href="https://github.com/tjira/acorn#compilation">Compilation</a>
  ·
  <a href="https://github.com/tjira/acorn#examples">Examples</a>
  ·
  <a href="https://tjira.github.io/acorn/">Docs</a>
</h4>

<p align="center">
    <a href="https://github.com/tjira/acorn/pulse">
        <img src="https://img.shields.io/github/last-commit/tjira/acorn?style=for-the-badge"/>
    </a>
    <a href="https://github.com/tjira/acorn/blob/master/LICENSE.md">
        <img src="https://img.shields.io/github/license/tjira/acorn?style=for-the-badge"/>
    </a>
    <a href="https://github.com/tjira/acorn/actions/workflows/test.yml">
        <img src="https://img.shields.io/github/actions/workflow/status/tjira/acorn/test.yml?style=for-the-badge&label=test"/>
    </a>
    <a href="https://github.com/tjira/acorn/stargazers">
        <img src="https://img.shields.io/github/stars/tjira/acorn?style=for-the-badge"/>
    </a>
    <br>
    <a href="https://github.com/tjira/acorn">
        <img src="https://img.shields.io/github/languages/code-size/tjira/acorn?style=for-the-badge"/>
    </a>
    <a href="https://github.com/tjira/acorn/releases/latest">
        <img src="https://img.shields.io/github/v/release/tjira/acorn?display_name=tag&style=for-the-badge"/>
    </a>
    <a href="https://github.com/tjira/acorn/releases/latest">
        <img src="https://img.shields.io/github/downloads/tjira/acorn/total?style=for-the-badge"/>
    </a>
</p>

<p align="center">
Quantum Acorn, a collection of electronic structure methods compiled into a small dependency-free binary. If you are here for the educational scripts, you can find them in the education folder.
</p>

## Features

Acorn offers a comprehensive suite of tools for both time-independent and time-dependent quantum mechanical simulations. Key features are grouped below for clarity.

### Time-Independent Quantum Mechanics

* **Hartree–Fock Methods**  
  Includes both restricted (RHF) and generalized (GHF) Hartree–Fock, enhanced with DIIS convergence acceleration.

* **Post-Hartree–Fock Methods**  
  Support for Møller–Plesset perturbation theory (MP2) and configuration interaction (CASCI) techniques.

* **Analytical Tools**  
  Computation of energy gradients, Hessians, vibrational frequencies, and geometry optimizations for all supported methods.

### Time-Dependent Quantum Mechanics

* **Quantum Dynamics Simulations**  
  Simulate quantum dynamics across arbitrary dimensions and electronic states using customizable potential energy surfaces.

* **Surface Hopping Algorithms**  
  Perform nonadiabatic dynamics with support for FSSH, LZSH, MASH, and κTSH methods, all on user-defined potentials.

## Acquiring the Software

### Downloading Release

You can download the latest release [here](https://github.com/tjira/acorn/releases/latest). Two versions of the executable are available, with one built using musl libc and the other using GNU libc. The musl version is a statically linked ELF executable that embeds its own C standard library and has no external runtime dependencies, allowing it to run on any Linux kernel regardless of the user space environment. The GNU version, linked against GNU libc, depends on the host system's runtime libraries but can offer better integration with glibc-based distributions.

### Compilation

First you need to have the zig compiler available. You can download the latest version of the zig compiler from the [official website](https://ziglang.org/download) or install it from your favourite package manager. After you have acquired the compiler, you need to have a few libraries installed on your system. You can download and compile them in the project root using the practical `./script/library.sh` script. After the libraries have compiled, navigate to the project root and run the following command to compile the project.

```bash
zig build && zig build script
```

This will compile the project and create a binary file named `acorn` in the `zig-out/arch-os-abi` folder, where `arch` is the architecture of your system, `os` is the operating system you are using and the default ABI is musl. It will also generate some usefull wrappers around the binary in the same folder. You can also perform tests on the project by running the following command.

```bash
zig build test
```

If some tests fail, let me know by creating an issue. If all the tests pass, you can run the binary file using the following command.

```bash
./zig-out/arch-os-abi/acorn
```

You should see the version of the compiler and execution time of the program. If you see this, the program is working correctly.

## Examples

Below are some examples of the quantum mechanical methods implemented in Acorn. The plotting commands use the script `plot.py` in the `python` folder. You can use this script to plot the data generated by the program.

- [Hartree–Fock Method](#hartreefock-method)
- [Møller–Plesset Perturbation Theory](#møllerplesset-perturbation-theory)
- [Real Time Adiabatic Quantum Dynamics](#real-time-adiabatic-quantum-dynamics)
- [Real Time Nonadiabatic Quantum Dynamics](#real-time-nonadiabatic-quantum-dynamics)
- [Surface Hopping Dynamics](#surface-hopping-dynamics)

### Hartree–Fock Method

The following input calculates the Hartree–Fock energy of a provided system. The system in the example is somewhat optimized water. If you want to provide an .xyz file with the coordinates of the system, simply delete the `system` field and add the `system_file` field with the path to the geometry file.

```json
{
    "hartree_fock" : {
        "system" : {
            "atoms" : [8, 1, 1],
            "coords" : [
                [-0.04, -0.01, -0.01],
                [ 0.65, -0.51,  0.47],
                [ 0.38,  0.87, -0.06]
            ]
        },
        "integral" : {
            "basis" : "sto-3g"
        }
    }
}
```

### Møller–Plesset Perturbation Theory

The following input calculates energy of a system using the MP2 method. The system is the same as for the Hartree–fock method.

```json
{
    "moller_plesset" : {
        "hartree_fock" : {
            "system" : {
                "atoms" : [8, 1, 1],
                "coords" : [
                    [-0.04, -0.01, -0.01],
                    [ 0.65, -0.51,  0.47],
                    [ 0.38,  0.87, -0.06]
                ]
            },
            "integral" : {
                "basis" : "sto-3g"
            }
        },
        "order" : 2
    }
}
```

### Real Time Adiabatic Quantum Dynamics

This example demonstrates the real-time quantum dynamics of a particle in a harmonic potential. The particle is initialized in a Gaussian wavepacket and allowed to evolve in time. The wavefunction is written to a file named `WAVEFUNCTION.mat` in the current directory. The input file for this example is shown below.

```json
{
    "quantum_dynamics" : {
        "adiabatic" : false,
        "iterations" : 1000,
        "mode" : [0, 1],
        "time_step" : 0.1,
        "grid" : {
            "limits" : [-8, 8],
            "points" : 512
        },
        "hamiltonian" : {
            "name" : "harmonic1D_1"
        },
        "initial_conditions" : {
            "mass" : 1,
            "momentum" : [0],
            "position" : [1],
            "state" : 0,
            "gamma" : 2
        },
        "write" : {
            "wavefunction" : "WAVEFUNCTION.mat",
            "autocorrelation_function" : "ACF.mat",
            "spectrum" : "SPECTRUM.mat"
        }
    }
}
```

The input file can be run like any other program in Acorn, no special flags are required. This simulation is fast and should complete in under a second. You can visualize the wavefunction, autocorrelation function or the vibrational spectrum with the commands below.

```bash
lines.py WAVEFUNCTION.mat:0,1 --legends every "Re(\$\Psi_0\$)" "Im(\$\Psi_0\$)" --xlabel "Coordinate (a.u.)" --ylabel "Wavefunction" --animate 2
```

```bash
lines.py ACF.mat:0,1 SPECTRUM.mat --figsize 6 16 --legends 0,1 "Re(\$<\Psi_0|\Psi>\$)" "Im(\$<\Psi_0|\Psi>\$)" --subplots 121 121 122 --xlabel "Time (a.u.)" "Energy (a.u.)" --xlim nan nan 0 6 --ylabel "ACF" "Intensity"
```

Acorn also supports higher dimensions. As an example you can simulate a 2D wavefunction in a 2D harmonic potential using the following input.

```json
{
    "quantum_dynamics" : {
        "adiabatic" : false,
        "iterations" : 1000,
        "mode" : [0, 1],
        "time_step" : 0.1,
        "grid" : {
            "limits" : [-8, 8],
            "points" : 256
        },
        "hamiltonian" : {
            "name" : "harmonic2D_1"
        },
        "initial_conditions" : {
            "mass" : 1,
            "momentum" : [0, 0],
            "position" : [1, 1],
            "state" : 0,
            "gamma" : 2
        },
        "write" : {
            "wavefunction" : "WAVEFUNCTION.mat",
            "autocorrelation_function" : "ACF.mat",
            "spectrum" : "SPECTRUM.mat"
        }
    }
}
```

This simulation takes a few seconds, since the time complexity increases exponentially. Visualizing the 3D complex wavefunction is a little tricky. One way is to plot the square of the wavefunction on a 2D heatmap. You can visualize the wavefunction this way and ACF with spectrum the same way as above with the commands below.

```bash
heatmap.py WAVEFUNCTION.mat:0,1 --xlabel "Coordinate (a.u.)" --ylabel "Coordinate (a.u.)" --transform norm --animate 2
```

```bash
lines.py ACF.mat:0,1 SPECTRUM.mat --figsize 6 16 --legends 0,1 "Re(\$<\Psi_0|\Psi>\$)" "Im(\$<\Psi_0|\Psi>\$)" --subplots 121 121 122 --xlabel "Time (a.u.)" "Energy (a.u.)" --xlim nan nan 0 9 --ylabel "ACF" "Intensity"
```

### Real Time Nonadiabatic Quantum Dynamics

This example demonstrates the real-time quantum dynamics of a first Tully potential in the adiabatic basis. It exports the resulting time-dependent wavefunction and the potential. The input file for this example is shown below.

```json
{
    "quantum_dynamics" : {
        "adiabatic" : true,
        "iterations" : 500,
        "mode" : [0, 1],
        "time_step" : 10,
        "grid" : {
            "limits" : [-16, 32],
            "points" : 2048
        },
        "hamiltonian" : {
            "name" : "tully1D_1"
        },
        "initial_conditions" : {
            "mass" : 2000,
            "momentum" : [10],
            "position" : [-10],
            "state" : 1,
            "gamma" : 2
        },
        "write" : {
            "wavefunction" : "WAVEFUNCTION.mat",
            "population" : "POPULATION.mat"
        }
    }
}
```

This simulation is fast and should complete approximately in a second. You can visualize the wavefunction and state population with the commands below. The wavefunctions on each states are vertically separated for better visualization.

```bash
lines.py WAVEFUNCTION.mat:0,1,2,3 --legends every "Re(\$\Psi_0\$)" "Im(\$\Psi_0\$)" "Re(\$\Psi_1\$)" "Im(\$\Psi_1\$)" --offsets every -1 -1 1 1 --xlabel "Coordinate (a.u.)" --ylabel "Wavefunction" --animate 4
```

```bash
lines.py POPULATION.mat --legends every "S\$_0\$" "S\$_1\$" --xlabel "Time (a.u.)" --ylabel "Population"
```

### Surface Hopping Dynamics

This example demonstrates how to run a surface hopping dynamics. The below example executes a Fewest Switches Surface Hopping (FSSH) dynamics on the same potential as the real-time nonadiabatic dynamics example above.

```json
{
    "classical_dynamics" : {
        "adiabatic" : true,
        "iterations" : 5000,
        "time_step" : 1,
        "trajectories" : 1000,
        "hamiltonian" : {
            "name" : "tully1D_1"
        },
        "initial_conditions" : {
            "mass" : [2000],
            "momentum_mean" : [10],
            "momentum_std" : [1],
            "position_mean" : [-10],
            "position_std" : [0.5],
            "state" : [0, 1]
        },
        "log_intervals" : {
            "iteration" : 500,
            "trajectory" : 100
        },
        "write" : {
            "population_mean" : "POPULATION_MEAN.mat"
        },
        "fewest_switches" : {}
    }
}
```

This simulation is slow and will take a few second to complete. You can visualize the mean population of each state with the command below.

```bash
lines.py POPULATION_MEAN.mat --legends every "S\$_0\$" "S\$_1\$" --xlabel "Time (a.u.)" --ylabel "Population"
```

Commit message:

bump the zig compiler version to 0.14.0

README.md, after:

<h1 align="center">Quantum Acorn</h1>

<h4 align="center">
  <a href="https://github.com/tjira/acorn#features">Features</a>
  ·
  <a href="https://github.com/tjira/acorn#compilation">Compilation</a>
  ·
  <a href="https://github.com/tjira/acorn#examples">Examples</a>
  ·
  <a href="https://tjira.github.io/acorn/">Docs</a>
</h4>

<p align="center">
    <a href="https://github.com/tjira/acorn/pulse">
        <img src="https://img.shields.io/github/last-commit/tjira/acorn?style=for-the-badge"/>
    </a>
    <a href="https://github.com/tjira/acorn/blob/master/LICENSE.md">
        <img src="https://img.shields.io/github/license/tjira/acorn?style=for-the-badge"/>
    </a>
    <a href="https://github.com/tjira/acorn/actions/workflows/test.yml">
        <img src="https://img.shields.io/github/actions/workflow/status/tjira/acorn/test.yml?style=for-the-badge&label=test"/>
    </a>
    <a href="https://github.com/tjira/acorn/stargazers">
        <img src="https://img.shields.io/github/stars/tjira/acorn?style=for-the-badge"/>
    </a>
    <br>
    <a href="https://github.com/tjira/acorn">
        <img src="https://img.shields.io/github/languages/code-size/tjira/acorn?style=for-the-badge"/>
    </a>
    <a href="https://github.com/tjira/acorn/releases/latest">
        <img src="https://img.shields.io/github/v/release/tjira/acorn?display_name=tag&style=for-the-badge"/>
    </a>
    <a href="https://github.com/tjira/acorn/releases/latest">
        <img src="https://img.shields.io/github/downloads/tjira/acorn/total?style=for-the-badge"/>
    </a>
</p>

<p align="center">
Quantum Acorn, a collection of electronic structure methods compiled into a small dependency-free binary. If you are here for the educational scripts, you can find them in the education folder.
</p>

## Features

Acorn offers a comprehensive suite of tools for both time-independent and time-dependent quantum mechanical simulations. Key features are grouped below for clarity.

### Time-Independent Quantum Mechanics

* **Hartree–Fock Methods**  
  Includes both restricted (RHF) and generalized (GHF) Hartree–Fock, enhanced with DIIS convergence acceleration.

* **Post-Hartree–Fock Methods**  
  Support for Møller–Plesset perturbation theory (MP2) and configuration interaction (CASCI) techniques.

* **Analytical Tools**  
  Computation of energy gradients, Hessians, vibrational frequencies, and geometry optimizations for all supported methods.

### Time-Dependent Quantum Mechanics

* **Quantum Dynamics Simulations**  
  Simulate quantum dynamics across arbitrary dimensions and electronic states using customizable potential energy surfaces.

* **Surface Hopping Algorithms**  
  Perform nonadiabatic dynamics with support for FSSH, LZSH, MASH, and κTSH methods, all on user-defined potentials.

## Acquiring the Software

### Downloading Release

You can download the latest release [here](https://github.com/tjira/acorn/releases/latest). Two versions of the executable are available, with one built using musl libc and the other using GNU libc. The musl version is a statically linked ELF executable that embeds its own C standard library and has no external runtime dependencies, allowing it to run on any Linux kernel regardless of the user space environment. The GNU version, linked against GNU libc, depends on the host system's runtime libraries but can offer better integration with glibc-based distributions.

### Compilation

To install all necessary prerequisites, you need to have a few libraries installed on your system. You can download and compile them in the project root using the practical `./script/library.sh` script. The script, among other things, downloads the zig compiler into the `zig-bin` directory. After the libraries have compiled, navigate to the project root and run the following command to compile the project.

```bash
./zig-bin/zig build && zig build script
```

This will compile the project and create a binary file named `acorn` in the `zig-out/arch-os-abi` folder, where `arch` is the architecture of your system, `os` is the operating system you are using and the default ABI is musl. It will also generate some usefull wrappers around the binary in the same folder. You can also perform tests on the project by running the following command.

```bash
./zig-bin/zig build test
```

If some tests fail, let me know by creating an issue. If all the tests pass, you can run the binary file using the following command.

```bash
./zig-out/arch-os-abi/acorn
```

You should see the version of the compiler and execution time of the program. If you see this, the program is working correctly.

## Examples

Below are some examples of the quantum mechanical methods implemented in Acorn. The plotting commands use the script `plot.py` in the `python` folder. You can use this script to plot the data generated by the program.

- [Hartree–Fock Method](#hartreefock-method)
- [Møller–Plesset Perturbation Theory](#møllerplesset-perturbation-theory)
- [Real Time Adiabatic Quantum Dynamics](#real-time-adiabatic-quantum-dynamics)
- [Real Time Nonadiabatic Quantum Dynamics](#real-time-nonadiabatic-quantum-dynamics)
- [Surface Hopping Dynamics](#surface-hopping-dynamics)

### Hartree–Fock Method

The following input calculates the Hartree–Fock energy of a provided system. The system in the example is somewhat optimized water. If you want to provide an .xyz file with the coordinates of the system, simply delete the `system` field and add the `system_file` field with the path to the geometry file.

```json
{
    "hartree_fock" : {
        "system" : {
            "atoms" : [8, 1, 1],
            "coords" : [
                [-0.04, -0.01, -0.01],
                [ 0.65, -0.51,  0.47],
                [ 0.38,  0.87, -0.06]
            ]
        },
        "integral" : {
            "basis" : "sto-3g"
        }
    }
}
```

### Møller–Plesset Perturbation Theory

The following input calculates energy of a system using the MP2 method. The system is the same as for the Hartree–fock method.

```json
{
    "moller_plesset" : {
        "hartree_fock" : {
            "system" : {
                "atoms" : [8, 1, 1],
                "coords" : [
                    [-0.04, -0.01, -0.01],
                    [ 0.65, -0.51,  0.47],
                    [ 0.38,  0.87, -0.06]
                ]
            },
            "integral" : {
                "basis" : "sto-3g"
            }
        },
        "order" : 2
    }
}
```

### Real Time Adiabatic Quantum Dynamics

This example demonstrates the real-time quantum dynamics of a particle in a harmonic potential. The particle is initialized in a Gaussian wavepacket and allowed to evolve in time. The wavefunction is written to a file named `WAVEFUNCTION.mat` in the current directory. The input file for this example is shown below.

```json
{
    "quantum_dynamics" : {
        "adiabatic" : false,
        "iterations" : 1000,
        "mode" : [0, 1],
        "time_step" : 0.1,
        "grid" : {
            "limits" : [-8, 8],
            "points" : 512
        },
        "hamiltonian" : {
            "name" : "harmonic1D_1"
        },
        "initial_conditions" : {
            "mass" : 1,
            "momentum" : [0],
            "position" : [1],
            "state" : 0,
            "gamma" : 2
        },
        "write" : {
            "wavefunction" : "WAVEFUNCTION.mat",
            "autocorrelation_function" : "ACF.mat",
            "spectrum" : "SPECTRUM.mat"
        }
    }
}
```

The input file can be run like any other program in Acorn, no special flags are required. This simulation is fast and should complete in under a second. You can visualize the wavefunction, autocorrelation function or the vibrational spectrum with the commands below.

```bash
lines.py WAVEFUNCTION.mat:0,1 --legends every "Re(\$\Psi_0\$)" "Im(\$\Psi_0\$)" --xlabel "Coordinate (a.u.)" --ylabel "Wavefunction" --animate 2
```

```bash
lines.py ACF.mat:0,1 SPECTRUM.mat --figsize 6 16 --legends 0,1 "Re(\$<\Psi_0|\Psi>\$)" "Im(\$<\Psi_0|\Psi>\$)" --subplots 121 121 122 --xlabel "Time (a.u.)" "Energy (a.u.)" --xlim nan nan 0 6 --ylabel "ACF" "Intensity"
```

Acorn also supports higher dimensions. As an example you can simulate a 2D wavefunction in a 2D harmonic potential using the following input.

```json
{
    "quantum_dynamics" : {
        "adiabatic" : false,
        "iterations" : 1000,
        "mode" : [0, 1],
        "time_step" : 0.1,
        "grid" : {
            "limits" : [-8, 8],
            "points" : 256
        },
        "hamiltonian" : {
            "name" : "harmonic2D_1"
        },
        "initial_conditions" : {
            "mass" : 1,
            "momentum" : [0, 0],
            "position" : [1, 1],
            "state" : 0,
            "gamma" : 2
        },
        "write" : {
            "wavefunction" : "WAVEFUNCTION.mat",
            "autocorrelation_function" : "ACF.mat",
            "spectrum" : "SPECTRUM.mat"
        }
    }
}
```

This simulation takes a few seconds, since the time complexity increases exponentially. Visualizing the 3D complex wavefunction is a little tricky. One way is to plot the square of the wavefunction on a 2D heatmap. You can visualize the wavefunction this way and ACF with spectrum the same way as above with the commands below.

```bash
heatmap.py WAVEFUNCTION.mat:0,1 --xlabel "Coordinate (a.u.)" --ylabel "Coordinate (a.u.)" --transform norm --animate 2
```

```bash
lines.py ACF.mat:0,1 SPECTRUM.mat --figsize 6 16 --legends 0,1 "Re(\$<\Psi_0|\Psi>\$)" "Im(\$<\Psi_0|\Psi>\$)" --subplots 121 121 122 --xlabel "Time (a.u.)" "Energy (a.u.)" --xlim nan nan 0 9 --ylabel "ACF" "Intensity"
```

### Real Time Nonadiabatic Quantum Dynamics

This example demonstrates the real-time quantum dynamics of a first Tully potential in the adiabatic basis. It exports the resulting time-dependent wavefunction and the potential. The input file for this example is shown below.

```json
{
    "quantum_dynamics" : {
        "adiabatic" : true,
        "iterations" : 500,
        "mode" : [0, 1],
        "time_step" : 10,
        "grid" : {
            "limits" : [-16, 32],
            "points" : 2048
        },
        "hamiltonian" : {
            "name" : "tully1D_1"
        },
        "initial_conditions" : {
            "mass" : 2000,
            "momentum" : [10],
            "position" : [-10],
            "state" : 1,
            "gamma" : 2
        },
        "write" : {
            "wavefunction" : "WAVEFUNCTION.mat",
            "population" : "POPULATION.mat"
        }
    }
}
```

This simulation is fast and should complete approximately in a second. You can visualize the wavefunction and state population with the commands below. The wavefunctions on each states are vertically separated for better visualization.

```bash
lines.py WAVEFUNCTION.mat:0,1,2,3 --legends every "Re(\$\Psi_0\$)" "Im(\$\Psi_0\$)" "Re(\$\Psi_1\$)" "Im(\$\Psi_1\$)" --offsets every -1 -1 1 1 --xlabel "Coordinate (a.u.)" --ylabel "Wavefunction" --animate 4
```

```bash
lines.py POPULATION.mat --legends every "S\$_0\$" "S\$_1\$" --xlabel "Time (a.u.)" --ylabel "Population"
```

### Surface Hopping Dynamics

This example demonstrates how to run a surface hopping dynamics. The below example executes a Fewest Switches Surface Hopping (FSSH) dynamics on the same potential as the real-time nonadiabatic dynamics example above.

```json
{
    "classical_dynamics" : {
        "adiabatic" : true,
        "iterations" : 5000,
        "time_step" : 1,
        "trajectories" : 1000,
        "hamiltonian" : {
            "name" : "tully1D_1"
        },
        "initial_conditions" : {
            "mass" : [2000],
            "momentum_mean" : [10],
            "momentum_std" : [1],
            "position_mean" : [-10],
            "position_std" : [0.5],
            "state" : [0, 1]
        },
        "log_intervals" : {
            "iteration" : 500,
            "trajectory" : 100
        },
        "write" : {
            "population_mean" : "POPULATION_MEAN.mat"
        },
        "fewest_switches" : {}
    }
}
```

This simulation is slow and will take a few second to complete. You can visualize the mean population of each state with the command below.

```bash
lines.py POPULATION_MEAN.mat --legends every "S\$_0\$" "S\$_1\$" --xlabel "Time (a.u.)" --ylabel "Population"
```
