TODO.md, before:

# TODO List

- [ ] Add BAGEL interface with excited state dynamics
- [ ] Add energy calculation for exact NAD
- [ ] Add exact solver for 2D HO
- [ ] Add excitation specifications to FCI
- [ ] Create a compare script that compares results with ORCA or Psi4
- [ ] Transform the NAD wavefunction to adiabatic basis
- [x] Add Mulliken analysis
- [x] Add some tests
- [x] Add the ability to export the atomic integrals
- [x] Add the ability to use orca to perform ground state dynamics
- [x] Check the correct working of the library before merging the fci branch
- [x] Fix gradient calculation
- [x] Fix the shells variable in system class that reads the basis each time the system is created
- [x] Implement Berendsen thermostat
- [x] Implement MP2 method
- [x] Implement general gradients
- [x] Implement passing of the density matrix to HF method
- [x] Implement the analytical gradient for RHF
- [x] Implement the unrestricted Hartree-Fock
- [x] Make the exact dynamic save files to the input folder
- [x] Make the exported library independent of libint
- [x] Make the matrix printing at the point of calculation not at the end
- [x] Make the output print the input and molecule specification
- [x] Modify restricted calculations to account for charge and multiplicity
- [x] Remove the python folder before merging the fci branch

Commit message:

add 2-dimensional exact quantum adiabatic dynamics

TODO.md, after:

# TODO List

- [ ] Add BAGEL interface with excited state dynamics
- [ ] Add energy calculation for exact NAD
- [ ] Add exact solver for 2D HO
- [ ] Add excitation specifications to FCI
- [ ] Add some compression for exact wavefunctions
- [ ] Create a compare script that compares results with ORCA or Psi4
- [ ] Make the plotwfn.py not read the whole file if static view specified
- [ ] Somehow specify the initial momentum for NAD
- [ ] Transform the NAD wavefunction to adiabatic basis
- [x] Add Mulliken analysis
- [x] Add some tests
- [x] Add the ability to export the atomic integrals
- [x] Add the ability to use orca to perform ground state dynamics
- [x] Check the correct working of the library before merging the fci branch
- [x] Fix gradient calculation
- [x] Fix the shells variable in system class that reads the basis each time the system is created
- [x] Implement Berendsen thermostat
- [x] Implement MP2 method
- [x] Implement general gradients
- [x] Implement passing of the density matrix to HF method
- [x] Implement the analytical gradient for RHF
- [x] Implement the unrestricted Hartree-Fock
- [x] Make the exact dynamic save files to the input folder
- [x] Make the exported library independent of libint
- [x] Make the matrix printing at the point of calculation not at the end
- [x] Make the output print the input and molecule specification
- [x] Modify restricted calculations to account for charge and multiplicity
- [x] Remove the python folder before merging the fci branch
